# Eclipse-level Image Artifacts 

At the individual observation-level there can be image artifacts resulting from the structure of the detector. Some artifacts are more prevalent in the NUV or FUV band. Checking an eclipse's images for artifacts, as not all are able to be comprehensively flagged, is an important step for verifying the data quality of an observation. Most artifacts detailed here are also discussed in the original mission's documentation.

### Hotspots and Coldspots 
Two artifacts that consistently appears in GALEX images regardless of observation type or duration are "hotspots" and "coldspots". Hotspots have very high count rates and generally occur in the same locations on the detector in most eclipses. Coldspots are similar to hotspots visually, but have very low count rates (~0 cps) even over long eclipses. Both coldspots and hotspots are important to identify for accurate photometric measurements, but hotspots have the added risk of possibly being identified as stars.

```{image} figures/hotspots.png
:alt: hot
:width: 650px
:align: center
```
*Figure: Example hotspots in a multi-leg NUV observation (left) and a faint hotspot in a FUV image (right).*

The GALEX mission team drew masks to cover common hotspots on the NUV and FUV detectors. These masks (`NUV_mask.fits` and `FUV_mask.fits` in the `cal_data` folder of gPhoton2) are still used in gPhoton2 to mask reoccurring, bright hotspots on both detectors. The mission mask is applied to the photons during gPhoton2 processing, and the hotspot flag generated by that mask is accessible in the [Flag Map as Flag 1](../Image File Formats.md## Flag Maps). However, some hotspots are transient and therefore not covered by the mission-generated hotspot mask. These un-masked hotspots could be mistakenly identified as stars during source-finding and require an additional quality metric to identify them. 

### Detector Window and Dichroic Beam Splitter Reflections
```{image} figures/dichroicghosts.png
:alt: ghosts
:width: 600px
:align: center
```
*Figure: The number of ghosts can vary with the number of legs in the image.*

Bright stars can have 1-2 reflections occur around them. The thick, three-pronged, and circular reflection in the image above is a reflection from the NUV detector window. Their shape in the dose images for an eclipse is similar, although more diffuse, than in the sky-projected count images. The smaller, bright circular reflections are due to the telescope's dichroic beam splitter. These reflections are radially offset due to the curvature of the detector window. 

### Edge Reflections 
```{image} figures/edgereflections.png
:alt: edge
:width: 600px
:align: center
```
*Figure: In eclipses with multiple legs in one image, multiple edge reflections can stack in one area as seen in the left image, as well as show the star from which the reflections originate. The right image shows the edge reflections in an observation with one leg.*

The structure of the MCP detector for the NUV band has a beveled edge connecting the MCP and the detector window. Stars near the edge of the detector or just off-detector can cause internal reflections off the bevel, which appear as faint to bright streaks in a count image. In dose images, the edge reflections often appear as stretched versions of the aspect pattern other stars have. Most edge reflections occur relatively close to the edge of the image, typically concentrated outside the 350 detrad mask backplane. 

### Edge to Interior Reflections 
```{image} figures/interiorghost.png
:alt: ghost2
:width: 600px
:align: center
```
*Figure: Interior ghosts range from very bright (left) to dim (right), with the circular shape more or less vertically squished .*

Sometimes edge reflections are larger and extend across the center of the detector in both count and dose images. The extent of an edge reflection is thought to be dependent on the off-detector star's exact location. 

### Broken FUV Image Edge  
```{image} figures/brokenfuv_edge.png
:alt: fuvedge
:width: 600px
:align: center
```
*Figure: The missing data in the FUV band is most prominent in the dose images.*
 

